# Responsive Fragments

Using HTML5 `data-attributes` with a device category 'keyword', containing a URL, on (empty) `div` -tags, to have jQuery (Ajax) load in (append) that URL as additional content when CSS changes the `body:after` CSS3 generated `content` value using a MediaQuery.

*This way of loading in additional content is inspired by **Jeremy Keith's Adactio blog article**: [Conditional CSS](http://adactio.com/journal/5429/) (april 27, 2012)*

This is great for creating HTML **prototypes** or even straight in production code.

### Note about CSS MediaQuery breakpoints and (now) populair devices

You really **shouldn't lock your CSS MediaQuery breakpoints** to (now) populair (mobile / tablet) width's of devices. Because that is going to change very quickly. Instead you view your web page at different viewport width's and when things start to look weird, at a CSS3 MediaQuery breakpoint and adjust the layout.

## Device categories

But ... you *could* create **4 breakpoint 'types'** related to a **device category** for your web page layout. These imaginary device categories can also be used in communication with your client and or project team.

1. You start mobile-first, which is using no breakpoint at all, but let's call it a `device-smartphone` category
2. Then a `device-tablet` category width comes along when the viewport gets wider
3. Then comes the `device-desktop` category width
4. And when your lucky, `device-wide` category width is the last one

Again, when you set the CSS3 MediaQuery breakpoints for these device categories (in `px` or preferred in `em`), don't use now populair device width's! The web is fluid, not fixed.

## HTML fragments

In the HTML you create these (empty) `div` -tags with a HTML5 `data-attribute` containing the URL which contains the (small) HTML fragment that you would like to load in when say the viewport is in the `device-tablet` category width. Of course this can also be a dynamic URL with HTML generated by server-side scripting languages.

### Tablet device category

`<div data-device-tablet="/fragments/sidebar.html"></div>`

### Desktop device category

`<div data-device-desktop="/fragments/heavy-social-media.html"></div>`

### Wide devices category

`<div data-device-wide="/fragments/big-video.html"></div>`

Of course you can use more of the above HTML tags in the same web page.

#### Mobile-first

With a bit of HTML, CSS and MediaQuery creativity you could use these empty `div` -tags to display **mobile-first** content by default. And later on have it replaced by `device-tablet` or `device-desktop` category HTML fragments.

## CSS sets a hidden device category 'keyword' on the body:after

In the [Adactio article](http://adactio.com/journal/5429/) they set a 'device category keyword' on the `body:after` CSS generated `content` using of course ... CSS3 MediaQueries.

When the viewport width changes, this keyword changes, according to the MediaQuery. You start **mobile-first**, but for the record, add the correct device 'keyword' for `device-smartphone`, but it is not going to be used by Javascript.

	@media (max-width: 320px) {
		body:after {
			content: 'device-smartphone';
			display: none;
		}
	}
	
	@media (min-width: 321px) and (max-width: 780px) {
		body:after {
			content: 'device-tablet';
			display: none;
		}
	}
		
	@media (min-width: 781px) and (max-width: 1024px) {
		 body:after {
			content: "device-desktop";
			display: none;
	}	
	
	@media (min-width: 1025px) {
		body:after {
			content: "device-wide";
			display: none;
		}
	}

The above breakpoints are used as an example. Don't set CSS3 MediaQuery breakpoints based on (now) populair (mobile / tablet) devices.

## A Javascript listner picks up the CSS keyword changes

The Adactio article explains how to use Javascript to 'read' this keyword from the `body:after` CSS generated `content`. A jQuery `$(window).resize()` function is attached to listen to changes of the viewport keyword.

When the viewport gets wider, CSS changes the device-category *keyword*, Javascript picks it up and, only once, loads in or rather `appends` the additional content (using Ajax) based on the HTML `data-device-tablet` URL on the `div` -tag. This can be static HTML or even dynamic HTML generated by server-side scripting languages.

When the keyword is `device-desktop` or`device-wide`, the Javascript should load in the 'lower' device fragments like `device-tablet` AND `device-desktop` as well.

## CSS hides the content again, based on the same viewport breakpoints

When the viewport becomes smaller you can use the same breakpoints to subsequently use CSS to `hide` these `div` -tags with the specific `data-attribute`. The additional content is already loaded so their is no shame to hide it using this method.

	@media (max-width: 320px) {
		body:after {
			content: "device-smartphone";
			display: none;
		}
		
		body [data-device-tablet],
		body [data-device-desktop],
		body [data-device-wide] {
			display: none;
		}
	}
	
## Browser support

Of course there is the issue of browser support. This technique relies on HTML5 `data-attributes`, CSS3 MediaQueries and a Javascript listner to 'read' the CSS3 generated content on the `body:after` element.

**Modern- and mobile- web browser all support these techniques but older (desktop) web browsers don't.** 

### Fallback

The Javascript loads in all the HTML fragments if the browser doesn't understand the above techniques. In this case the device category for this type of device should be `device-wide`. This mainly concerns **Windows Internet Explorer 8** and lower versions and maybe older mobile browsers.